.. _beginner:

Beginner Guide
==============
The following is a small guide for users new to pygrametl. It shows the main
constructs provided by pygrametl and how to use them to create a simple ETL flow
for a made-up example. The example is a small data warehouse for a chain of book
stores and is shown below as :ref:`dwexample`. The warehouse has one fact table
and three dimensions organized in a star schema. The fact table stores facts
about how many of each book is sold each day. The book dimension store the name
and genre of each sold book, the location dimension store the city and region of
the store, and the time dimension store the date of a sale. To keep the example
simple, none of the dimensions are snowflaked, nor do they contain any slowly
changing attributes. These are however supported by pygrametl through
:class:`.SnowflakedDimension`, :class:`.TypeOneSlowlyChangingDimension`, and
:class:`.SlowlyChangingDimension`. In addition, pygrametl provides constructs
for creating high-level multiprocess or multithreaded ETL flow, depending on the
implementation of Python used (see :ref:`parallel`). pygrametl also simplifies
testing by making it easy to define preconditions and postconditions for an ETL
flow without relying on external files for the input and the expected results
(see :ref:`testing`).

.. note::
   When using pygrametl, we strongly encourage you to use named parameters when
   instantiating classes, both to improve readability and to prevent future
   errors in the event of changes to the API

.. _dwexample:

.. figure:: ../_static/example.svg
    :align: center
    :alt: bookstore data warehouse example

    Data Warehouse example

Input Data
----------
Most pygrametl abstractions either produce, consume, or operate on data in rows.
A row is a Python :class:`.dict` where the row's column names are the keys and
the values are the data the row contains. For more information about the data
source provided by pygrametl see :ref:`datasources`.

The most important data for the warehouse are which books have been sold. This
information can be extracted from the chain's sales records. The table storing
this data is shown below:

.. code-block:: none

   | book:text             | genre:text | store:text | timestamp:date | sale:int |
   | --------------------- | ---------- | ---------- | -------------- | -------- |
   | Nineteen Eighty-Four  | Novel      | Aalborg    | 2005/08/05     | 50       |
   | Calvin and Hobbes One | Comic      | Aalborg    | 2005/08/05     | 25       |
   | The Silver Spoon      | Cookbook   | Aalborg    | 2005/08/14     | 5        |
   | The Silver Spoon      | Cookbook   | Odense     | 2005/09/01     | 7        |
   | ....                  |            |            |                |	         |


As the geographical information stored in the sales records are limited, the
location dimension is pre-filled with data from the CSV file region.csv. The
file contains data as shown below (tabs are added for readability):

.. code-block:: none

    city,       region
    Aalborg,    North Denmark Region
    Odense,     Region of Southern Denmark
    ....


ETL Flow
--------
The ETL flow is designed to run on CPython and use PostgreSQL as the RDBMS.
However, it can easily be run on other Python implementations like Jython. For
example, to use Jython the :pep:`249` database driver psycopg2 and
:class:`.ConnectionWrapper` must simply be replaced with PostgreSQL `JDBC
<https://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=221>`_ driver and
:class:`.JDBCConnectionWrapper`. For more information about running pygrametl on
Jython see :ref:`jython`.

We start by importing the various functions and classes needed for the simple
ETL flow. The psycopg2 database driver must be imported so a connection to
PostgreSQL can be established, and the main pygrametl module is imported so a
:class:`.ConnectionWrapper` can be created. pyggrametl's :mod:`.datasources`
module is imported so the sales records (:class:`.SQLSource`) and region.csv
(:class:`.CSVSource`) can be read. Classes for interacting with the fact table
(:class:`.FactTable`) and the various dimensions (:class:`.Dimension`) are
imported from :mod:`.tables`.

.. code-block:: python

    # psycopg2 is a database driver allowing CPython to access PostgreSQL
    import psycopg2

    # pygrametl's __init__ file provides a set of helper functions and more
    # importantly the class ConnectionWrapper for wrapping PEP 249 connections
    import pygrametl

    # pygrametl makes it simple to read external data through datasources
    from pygrametl.datasources import SQLSource, CSVSource

    # Interacting with the dimensions and the fact table is done through a set
    # of classes. A suitable object must be created for each
    from pygrametl.tables import Dimension, FactTable

A connection to the database containing the sales records and the data warehouses
is needed. For CPython, these must be PEP 249 connections. As the data warehouse
connection will be shared by multiple pygrametl abstractions, an instance of
:class:`.ConnectionWrapper` is created. The first instance of this class is set
as the default connection for pygrametl's abstractions. This allows pygrametl to
be used without having to pass a connection to each abstraction that needs it. A
:class:`.ConnectionWrapper` is not needed for the connection to the sales
database as it is only used by one :class:`.CSVSource`, so in that case, the PEP
249 connection is used directly. For more information about database connections
in pygrametl see :ref:`database`.

.. code-block:: python

    # Creation of a database connection to the sales database with a simple
    # connection string, specifying the necessary host, username, and password
    sales_string = "host='localhost' dbname='sale' user='user' password='pass'"
    sales_pgconn = psycopg2.connect(sales_string)

    # A connection is also created to the data warehouse. The connection is
    # then given to a ConnectionWrapper so it becomes implicitly shared between
    # all the pygrametl abstractions that needs it without being passed around
    dw_string = "host='localhost' dbname='dw' user='dwuser' password='dwpass'"
    dw_pgconn = psycopg2.connect(dw_string)

    # Although the ConnectionWrapper is shared automatically between pygrametl
    # abstractions, it is saved in a variable so the connection can be closed
    dw_conn_wrapper = pygrametl.ConnectionWrapper(connection=dw_pgconn)

To get data into the ETL flow, two data sources are created. One for the
database containing the sales records, and one for the CSV file containing the
region information. For more information about the various data sources see
:ref:`datasources`.

.. code-block:: python

    # The location dimension stores the name of a location in the column city
    # instead of in the column store as in the input data from the sales
    # database. By passing SQLSource a sequence of names matching the number of
    # columns in the table it can automatically rename the columns
    name_mapping= 'book', 'genre', 'city', 'timestamp', 'sale'

    # Extraction of rows from a database using a PEP 249 connection and SQL
    sales_source = SQLSource(connection=sales_pgconn, query=
                             "SELECT book, genre, store, timestamp, sale FROM sales",
                             names=name_mapping)

    # Extraction of rows from a CSV file does not require a PEP 249 connection,
    # just an open file handler. pygrametl uses Python's DictReader for CSV
    # files and the header of the CSV file contains the name of each column
    region_file_handle = open('region.csv', 'r', 16384)
    region_source = CSVSource(f=region_file_handle, delimiter=',')

An object must then be created for each dimension and fact table in the data
warehouse. pygrametl provides many types of abstractions for dimensions and fact
tables, but in this example, we use the simplest ones. For more information
about the more advanced dimension and fact table classes, see :ref:`dimensions`
and :ref:`facttables`.

.. code-block:: python

    # An instance of Dimension is created for each dimension in the data
    # warehouse. For each dimension, the name of the database table, the table's
    # primary key, and the table's non-key columns (attributes) are given. In
    # addition, for the location dimension the subset of the attributes that
    # should be used to lookup the primary key are given As mentioned in the
    # beginning of this guide, using named parameters is strongly encouraged
    book_dimension = Dimension(
        name='book',
        key='bookid',
        attributes=['book', 'genre'])

    time_dimension = Dimension(
        name='time',
        key='timeid',
        attributes=['day', 'month', 'year'])

    location_dimension = Dimension(
        name='location',
        key='locationid',
        attributes=['city', 'region'],
        lookupatts=['city'])

    # A single instance of FactTable is created for the data warehouse's single
    # fact table. It is created with the name of the table, a list of columns
    # constituting the primary key of the fact table, and the list of measures
    fact_table = FactTable(
        name='facttable',
        keyrefs=['bookid', 'locationid', 'timeid'],
        measures=['sale'])

As the input timestamp is a datetime object and the time dimension consists of
multiple levels (day, month, and year), the datetime object must be split into
its separate values. For this, a normal Python function is created and passed
each of the rows. As pygrametl is a Python package, data transformations can be
implemented using standard Python without any syntactic additions or
restrictions. This also means that Python's many packages can be used as part of
an ETL flow.

.. code-block:: python

    # A normal Python function is used to split the timestamp into its parts
    def split_timestamp(row):
        """Splits a timestamp containing a date into its three parts"""

        # First the timestamp is extracted from the row dictionary
        timestamp = row['timestamp']

        # Then each part is reassigned to the row dictionary. It can then be
        # accessed by the caller as the row is a reference to the dict object
        row['year'] = timestamp.year
        row['month'] = timestamp.month
        row['day'] = timestamp.day

Finally, the data can be inserted into the data warehouse. All rows from
region.csv are inserted into the location dimension first. This is necessary for
foreign keys to the location dimension to be computed while filling the fact
table. The other two dimensions are filled while inserting the facts as the data
needed is included in the sales records. To ensure that the data is committed to
the database and that the connection is closed correctly, the methods
:meth:`.ConnectionWrapper.commit` and :meth:`.ConnectionWrapper.close` are
executed at the end.

.. code-block:: python

    # The Location dimension is filled with data from the CSV file as the file
    # contains information for both columns in the table. If the dimension was
    # filled using the sales database, it would be necessary to update the
    # region attribute with data from the CSV file later anyway. To perform the
    # insertion, the method Dimension.insert() is used which inserts a row into
    # the table, and the connection wrapper is asked to commit to ensure that
    # the data is present in the database to allow for lookups of keys for the
    # fact table
    [location_dimension.insert(row) for row in region_source]

    # The file handle for the CSV file can then be closed
    region_file_handle.close()

    # All the information needed for the other dimensions are stored in the
    # sales database. So during a single iteration over the sales record the ETL
    # flow can split the timestamp, and lookup the three dimension keys needed
    # for the fact table. While retrieving dimension keys pygrametl updates each
    # dimension with any new data as Dimension.ensure() is used. This method
    # combines a lookup with a insertion so a new row is only inserted into the
    # dimension or fact table if it does not yet exist
    for row in sales_source:

        # The timestamp is split into its three parts
        split_timestamp(row)

        # The row is updated with the correct primary keys for each dimension, and
        # any new data are inserted into each of the dimensions at the same time
        row['bookid'] = book_dimension.ensure(row)
        row['timeid'] = time_dimension.ensure(row)

        # ensure() is not used for the location dimension as it has already been
	# filled. lookup() does not insert any data and returns None, if no row
	# with the requested data is available. This allow users to control
	# error handling in the ETL flow. In this case an error is raised if a
	# location is missing from region.csv as recovery is not possible
        row['locationid'] = location_dimension.lookup(row)
        if not row['locationid']:
            raise ValueError("A city was not present in the location dimension")

        # As the number of sales is already aggregated in the sales records, the
        # row can now be inserted into the data warehouse. If aggregation, or
        # other more advanced transformations are required, the full power
        # Python is available as shown with the call to split_timestamp
        fact_table.insert(row)

    # After all the data have been inserted, the connection is asked to commit
    # and then closed to ensure that all data is committed to the database and
    # that the connection is correctly released
    dw_conn_wrapper.commit()
    dw_conn_wrapper.close()

    # Finally, the connection to the sales database is closed
    sales_pgconn.close()

This small example shows how to quickly create a very simple ETL flow with
pygrametl. A combined version with fewer comments can be seen below. However, as
stated since this is a very small and simple example, the caching and bulk
loading built into some of the more advanced dimension and fact table classes
has not been used. In anything but very small ETL flows, these should be used to
significantly increase the throughput of an ETL flow. See :ref:`dimensions` and
:ref:`facttables` for more information. The simple parallel capabilities of
pygrametl can also be used to increase the throughput of an ETL program (see
:ref:`parallel`), and the correctness of an ETL flow should be checked using a
set of automated repeatable tests (see :ref:`testing`).


.. code-block:: python

    import psycopg2
    import pygrametl
    from pygrametl.datasources import SQLSource, CSVSource
    from pygrametl.tables import Dimension, FactTable

    # Opening of connections and creation of a ConnectionWrapper
    sales_string = "host='localhost' dbname='sale' user='user' password='pass'"
    sales_pgconn = psycopg2.connect(sales_string)

    dw_string = "host='localhost' dbname='dw' user='dwuser' password='dwpass'"
    dw_pgconn = psycopg2.connect(dw_string)
    dw_conn_wrapper = pygrametl.ConnectionWrapper(connection=dw_pgconn)

    # Creation of data sources for the sales database and the CSV file,
    # containing extra information about cities and regions in Denmark
    name_mapping = 'book', 'genre', 'city', 'timestamp', 'sale'
    sales_source = SQLSource(connection=sales_pgconn, query=
                             "SELECT book, genre, store, timestamp, sale FROM sales",
                             names=name_mapping)

    region_file_handle = open('region.csv', 'r', 16384)
    region_source = CSVSource(f=region_file_handle, delimiter=',')

    # Creation of dimension and fact table abstractions for use in the ETL flow
    book_dimension = Dimension(
        name='book',
        key='bookid',
        attributes=['book', 'genre'])

    time_dimension = Dimension(
        name='time',
        key='timeid',
        attributes=['day', 'month', 'year'])

    location_dimension = Dimension(
        name='location',
        key='locationid',
        attributes=['city', 'region'],
        lookupatts=['city'])

    fact_table = FactTable(
        name='facttable',
        keyrefs=['bookid', 'locationid', 'timeid'],
        measures=['sale'])

    # Python function needed to split the timestamp into its three parts
    def split_timestamp(row):
        """Splits a timestamp containing a date into its three parts"""

        # Splitting of the timestamp into parts
        timestamp = row['timestamp']
        row['year'] = timestamp.year
        row['month'] = timestamp.month
        row['day'] = timestamp.day

    # The location dimension is loaded from the CSV file, and in order for
    # the data to be present in the database, the shared connection is asked
    # to commit
    [location_dimension.insert(row) for row in region_source]

    # The file handle for the CSV file can then be closed
    region_file_handle.close()

    # Each row in the sales database is iterated through and inserted
    for row in sales_source:

        # Each row is passed to the timestamp split function for splitting
        split_timestamp(row)

        # Lookups are performed to find the key in each dimension for the fact
        # and if the data is not there, it is inserted from the sales row
        row['bookid'] = book_dimension.ensure(row)
        row['timeid'] = time_dimension.ensure(row)

        # The location dimension is pre-filled, so a missing row is an error
        row['locationid'] = location_dimension.lookup(row)
        if not row['locationid']:
            raise ValueError("city was not present in the location dimension")

        # The row can then be inserted into the fact table
        fact_table.insert(row)

    # The data warehouse connection is then ordered to commit and close
    dw_conn_wrapper.commit()
    dw_conn_wrapper.close()

    # Finally, the connection to the sales database is closed
    sales_pgconn.close()
